CHAPTER VI

THE MIDDLE GAME



GENERAL REMARKS



HAVING now a fair knowledge of the end-game, we should be in a
position to appreciate how the middle game should be conducted.
We must throughout maintain a favourable pawn formation, in view
of the end-game which might be forced on us by exchanges. On the
other hand, as soon as we have gained an advantage sufficient to
secure the victory in the end-game, we must ourselves, by the
exchange of pieces, try to reduce the position to one of the
typical elementary cases which we have discussed. Now it will
invariably be found that beginners are unwilling to make these
essential exchanges. This is explained by the attraction which
combinations involving the action of many pieces have for them.
They assume that exchanges, particularly of the Queens, make the
games dull. Such ideas only prove that the beginner has not
grasped the nature of chess, the essence of which is stern logic
and uncompromising conclusions, and this demands the shortest and
clearest way leading to a mate. To the strong player, able to
play logically, logic will always be inseparable from beauty in
chess.

To play logically means to subordinate all combinations to a
leading plan of campaign, but there is difficulty in finding the
latter. An unsound scheme, even if worked out to its logical
conclusion, can of course be of no value. All the same it is
better than no plan at all. And in time one gains by experience,
and develops a sort of instinct for rejecting from the large
number of possible operations all those which, properly
countered, cannot bring any advantage.

Beside practical play, which is essential in order to gain this
instinct, a methodical theoretical instruction is of inestimable
value, and accelerates the development of the student's mind. Now
the instruction I wish to give in the THEORY of chess will not
take the form of an ANALYSIS, brought up right into the middle
game, of the various openings, tested and found correct in master
play. Such collections erroneously bear the title of "Theory of
the Openings," and are, besides, quite useless at this stage,
since they only embody the results of ANALYSIS.

It is first necessary to ascertain a few leading principles,
which can be taught in a most simple manner, by the exercise of
common sense, rather than by applying oneself to the study of
long-winded analysis. The student will no longer need to discover
time-worn maxims in the light of his own weary experience, and on
the other hand, these principles will help him to understand
analysis, and to keep clearly before his mind's eye the common
and principal lines of play, of which he might easily lose sight
in the labyrinth of suggested variations.

I propose to show the application of such principles to master
play, and this will give us a further opportunity of deeper
study, both of the rules set out in the first part for conducting
the opening correctly, and of the end-game principles, which
should be well considered.

I have made the pawn skeleton with its attendant grouping of
pieces the main consideration in the study of the opening; now in
the investigation of the problems of the middle game, I will
start from the TRANSFORMATION which the pawn skeleton has to
undergo in the course of further operations.  In my opinion this
is the best starting-point for the choice of effective manoeuvres
of the different pieces.

Before we are able to evolve a practical scheme we must have
under consideration the following important points:  How do we
know if an attack is likely to succeed? In other words: On what
point should I concentrate the attack? It should be clear to all
that it is of no possible use to direct an attack on anything
that can move away. Yet beginners frequently infringe this
obvious rule, and I have often witnessed manoeuvres such as these
(Diagram 90):

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #Kt| #P |    | #Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #B |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^P |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 90

1. P-QR3, 2. P-QKt4, and then, after the B has retired to his Kt3
even, 3. R-QKt1, 4. P-QR4, 5. P-R5. Meanwhile Black will have
played P-QR3, to make a loophole for his B at R2, and what is the
result? The Black Bishop is as effectual at R2 as at B4, but
White has advanced his pawns, and weakened them, as they are now
more liable to attack. Moreover, White has used up five moves to
achieve his aim, whilst Black only needed three. Therefore Black
has gained two moves, which he can use for the development of his
pieces.

Diagram 91 illustrates another mistake frequently made in the
choice of an objective, and one which can utterly spoil the whole
game, even in its earliest stage. Black has to

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q | #K | #B | #Kt| #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #P |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^Q | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B |    | ^K | ^B |    | ^R |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 91

move, and his game is somewhat hindered by the dominating
position of the White Queen. The latter prevents the Bishop from
occupying a desirable square at his QB4, and also makes the
liberating move P-Q4 impossible. Therefore it would seem
desirable to drive the Queen away. But this should only be done
if it is not attended by some further disadvantage.

Now the average player is not particularly fastidious in his
methods. The Queen irritates him, therefore the Queen must be
repelled one way or the other. He would probably try P-QB4. The
result is that the Queen selects another good square, for
instance at K3 or QR4, but Black has not improved matters, for he
still can play neither B-B4 nor P-Q4.  On the other hand,
irredeemable harm has been done, inasmuch as the Black QP now
remains "backward." The attack on the Queen by P-QB4 must
consequently be rejected.  Sallies such as these, in which short-
lived attacks are made by pawns upon pieces, are always of
doubtful value. They must unquestionably be avoided if they break
up the pawn skeleton, which is formed in the opening, and confine
the mobility of the pieces.

Also with regard to manoeuvres of PIECES, intended solely to
drive away an opposing piece, it is obviously essential that the
attacking pieces in effecting their purpose should not be made to
stray too far afield, lest they become out of play.

I shall delay dealing with the features underlying good forms of
attack, both by pieces and pawns, until I have treated of the
choice of an objective.

From what we have already expounded, it is clear that the subject
of an attack should be incapable of evasion. Should it, in the
course of attack, be desired to prevent a PIECE from being moved,
that can only be effected by means of a "pin." A PAWN, however,
can be held in place either by occupying the square immediately
in front of it, or by controlling the latter with more forces
than the opponent can bring to bear upon it.

        ---------------------------------------
     8 |    |    |    | #R |    |    | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    |    | #Q | #R | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P | #P |    | #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^P |    | ^P | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    | ^P |    | ^R |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    |    | ^Q |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 |    |    |    | ^R |    |    | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 92

The last two diagrams exemplify this. If in Diagram 91 Black
makes the mistake of playing P-QB4 as suggested, the backward QP
becomes a welcome objective for White's attack. White can keep
that pawn back by playing P-Q B4 as soon as it threatens to
advance, after which he would develop quietly, double his Rooks,
and bring the Q and QB to bear in a concentrated attack on Q6. A
position not unlike that in Diagram 92 will result ultimately, in
which Black defends the pawn as many times as it is attacked, but
in which White can bring up his KP to the attack, as the QP
cannot move away, whilst Black has no further defensive move at
his disposal.  Play against a backward pawn nearly always
develops on these lines, and is even easier when there is no
defending B of the same colour as the pawn. (See p. 40, and Game
No. 26.)

Such manoeuvres, in the course of which pieces are pinned and
attacked, are illustrated in Diagram 90. The most obvious move,
which initiates an attack and at the same time completes the
development of the minor pieces, is B-Kt5.  Attacks by means of
such devices are so frequent and varied that it will be necessary
to treat them at some length, which I now propose to do. I should
also add that, with regard to Diagram 90, the student will derive
lasting benefit from a thorough study of the position, and will
thus improve his power to judge of the desirability, or
otherwise, of obtaining open files, diagonals, doubled pawns,
etc. After B-KKt5, the threat is to attack the Knight a second
and third time with Kt-Q5, and Q-B3, after moving the KKt away.
As Black's KKt is only supported twice, and there is no chance of
bringing up more forces for its defence, Black must undertake
something to provide against the threatened onslaught.

The most natural plan is to develop the QB at K3, from where it
can be exchanged for the Knight should Kt-Q5 be played. The
doubled pawn, which White could force by exchanging the Bishops,
is in no way detrimental to Black's game. On the contrary, the
opening of the file for the Rook, with the attendant chance of
playing P-Q4 supported by the doubled pawn, gives Black the
advantage.

The doubled pawn which Black obtains after 2. Kt-Q5, BxKt; 3. PxB
(or 3. BxB), Kt-K2; 4. BxKt, would also be of no help to White.
The apparent weakness created in Black's game at KB3 and KR3 by
the disappearance of the KtP does not assist White in this case,
because the pieces which could take advantage of such a weakness,
the QB and the Kt at Q5, have been exchanged. There only remains
the KKt and the Q for an immediate attack, whilst the Black Rook
will soon get into effective action on the open Knight's file,
e.g. 5. Q-Q2, K-R1; 6. Q-R6, Kt-Kt3; 7. Kt-R4, KtxKt; 8. QxKt, Q-
K2, followed by the doubling of the Rooks on the Kt file.
Considerations of a similar nature would tend to show that 1. B-
Kt5, Kt-K2; 2. BxKt, PxB is in favour of Black. The White QB,
which is so effective in taking advantage of weaknesses at
Black's KB3 and R3, has been exchanged. The Queen's Knight is not
available for attack on the KBP, as it would be exchanged or else
driven off in time by P-B3. Compared with the position considered
above, which occurs after 1. ... B-K3, 2. Kt-Q5, Black has the
further advantage of maintaining his QB, which makes it possible
to push the weak KBP on to his fourth, and either exchange it or
push it still further to B5, a useful and secure position.

Matters would be different were Black to allow his King's wing to
be broken up without getting rid of White's dangerous pieces by
exchanges. Let us consider what happens, if Black takes no
measures against Kt-Q5, but only prevents White's ultimate Q-B3
by pinning the Knight with B-KKt5. White gains a decisive
advantage by bringing his Queen into play before Black is able to
secure himself against the threatened combined attack of Q and B,
or alternately Q and Kt by K-R1, R-Kt1-Kt3. I will give two
examples of how the whole game now centres on the attack and
defence of the points weakened by the disappearance of the KtP,
and how White pushes home his advantage in the one instance with
the help of the B, in the other by the co-operation of the Kt.


     I. 1. B-KKt5, B-KKt5; 2. Kt-Q5, Kt-Q5; 3. Q-Q2, BxKt?; 4.
BxKt, PxB; 5. Q-R6, and there is no reply to the threat of KtxPch
and QxP mate, except through the sacrifice of the Q. Forcing the
exchange of Knights is of no avail, for after 5. ... Kt-K7ch;  6.
K-R1, BxPch; 7. KxB, Kt-B5ch; 8. KtxKt, PxKt; 9. K-R1, White
occupies the Kt file first and wins easily: 9. ... K-R1; 10. R-
KKt1, R-KKt1; 11. RxR, QxR;  12. R-KKt1 followed by mate or loss
of the Queen.

     II. 3. Q-Q2, P-B3; 4. KtxKtch, PxKt; 5. B-R4!  BxKt; 6. Q-
R6, Kt-K7ch; 7. K-R1, BxPch; 8. KxB, Kt-B5ch; 9. K-R1, Kt-Kt3.
Now Black has succeeded in interrupting the White Queen's action
on the BP. But it has taken many moves, with the sole result that
Black's Queen's Knight is better placed. All the other pieces,
however, occupy the positions they took up in the opening.  The
Black Knight, moreover, is only supported by the RP until Black
manages to block the White Bishop's diagonal by P-Q4. Meanwhile
White has gained a big start, and is ready to occupy the open
file with his Rooks. The sequel might be: 10. P-Q4!, BxP (if PxP;
11. P-K5!!, QPxP; 12. R-KKt1, etc.); 11. P-B3, B-Kt3; 12. QR-Q1,
K-R1; 13. R-KKt1, Q-K2; 14. R-Q3, R-KKt1; 15. R-R3, R-Kt2 (KtxB;
16. QxRPch!!); 16. R-B3, followed by BxP (B6).

Taking it all in all, we see from the foregoing that the pinning
of the Black Knight can only be injurious to Black if he does not
take timely measures to provide against White's Kt-Q5, which
threatens to concentrate more forces for the attack on KB6 than
Black is able to mobilise for its defence.

Beginners, after having experienced frequent trouble through
their inadequate defence of this kind of attack, try to avoid
their recurrence by making such pinning moves impossible from the
first and playing P-R3 on whichever side the pin is threatened.
Apart from the loss of time, on which I remarked at length when
discussing the opening, such pawn moves have various other
drawbacks.

With every pawn move it should be considered whether the squares
protected by the pawn before it has moved may not need the
support of that pawn at a later stage. This is particularly the
case with regard to squares in front of the castled King. If one
of those pawns pushes on, the squares which have lost its
protection frequently offer an opening for a direct attack by the
enemy's pieces on the King.

A second consideration is the fact that the advancing pawn itself
becomes a target for an assault in which the opponent, moving up
a pawn on the next file, brings his Rooks into play, or in which
he sacrifices a piece for the advanced pawn and the one that
protects it, thus robbing the King of the protection he sought to
obtain in castling.

The following examples will contribute much to the understanding
of this most important subject, the grasp of which will mean a
great step forward for the student.

The position in Diagram 93 is from a game v. Scheve-Teichmann
(Berlin, 1907). White played 1. P-R3 in order to avoid the
pinning of his Knight through B-Kt5. The move is not unjustified,
as the Knight is required for the support of the square at Q4.
The pawn move, however, has the drawbacks enumerated above, and
White must think of keeping a sufficiency of pieces for the fight
on the King's wing, in order to prevent Black from utilising the
weakness thus created for a combined assault by superior forces.

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B |    | #K |    | #Kt| #R |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #B | #P | #P |    | #Q | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    | #Kt| #P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 | ^P |    |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    | ^B | ^P | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    |    | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 |    | ^P |    |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R | ^Kt| ^B | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 93

In this case White does not take precautionary measures, and
succumbs in a surprisingly short time.

1. ... Kt-B3; 2. PxP? With this move White opens the diagonal for
Black's KB for no apparent reason. 2. ... QKtxP; 3. KtxKt?
Instead of providing for the defence of his King's wing, White
exchanges one of the King's side pieces, 3. ... QxKt; 4. Kt-Q2,
BxP! White has provoked this sacrifice by his last two moves. The
KBP is pinned, and the Q enters by way of her Kt6, the protection
of which was given up by pushing on the RP. The rest is easy; 5.
PxB, Q-Kt6ch; 6. K-R1, QxPch; 7. K-Kt1, Kt-Kt5; 8. Kt-B3, Q-
Kt6ch; 9. K-R1, BxP; 10. resigns.

Diagram 94 shows a position from a game Marshall-Burn  (Ostend,
1907). Strong in the knowledge that the Black Queen's side pieces
are not developed, and can only with difficulty be of assistance
in the defence of the King's side because of their limited
mobility, White takes advantage of the weakness created by the
advance of the Black KKt pawn to his third, and initiates an
immediate assault on the King's stronghold.

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P | #Kt| #P | #P | #B | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #P |    | #Kt| #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P |    | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    | ^B | ^P | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P | ^Kt|    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q | ^K |    |    | ^R |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 94

1. P-KR4, R-K1; 2. P-R5. This forces open the Rook's file. If the
pawn were still at Kt2, Black would simply let White push on to
R6 and then reply with P-KKt3.  2. ... KtxP; 3. RxKt, White
concludes the game in brilliant style. Black's wrong development
has given a welcome opportunity for sacrificial combinations. Now
the KB has an open diagonal, the pawn position is broken, and
White's Q and R have no difficulty in using the Rook's file for a
deadly attack.  3. ... PxR; 4. BxPch, KxB; 5. Kt-Kt5ch, K-Kt3 (if
K-Kt1, then 6. QxP, Kt-B3; 7. QxPch, K-R1; 8. Castles, etc.); 6.
QKt-B3, P-K4; 7. Kt-R4ch, K-B3; 8. Kt-R7ch, K-K2; 9. Kt-B5ch, K-
K3; 10. KtxBch, K-K2; 11. Kt-B5ch, K-K3; 12. P-Q5ch, KxKt; 13.
QxPch, K-K5; 14. Castles, followed by P-B3 or R-Q4 mate.

In cases where both sides have already castled on the same wing,
and the opponent has weakened his position by pushing on one of
the pawns of that wing, it is seldom advisable to start an attack
with the advance of one of the pawns in front of the King, as the
latter's position would be weakened. An attack of this kind is
only justified if there is a prospect of concentrating with all
speed a superior force before the opponent has time for a counter
attack.

The Black position in Diagram 95 illustrates one much favoured by
"natural" players. Here the advance of the

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #B | #P | #P | #Kt| #P | #B | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    | #P | #Kt|    | #P |    | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^Kt| ^B | ^B | ^Kt|    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 95

KRP would not be a suitable plan of attack for White as his Rook
is no longer on the Rook's file, nor could it be brought back in
time. In this case White must endeavour to take advantage of the
weaknesses at Black's KB3 and KR3, produced by his move P-KKt3.
This will be the modus operandi: Q-Q2 followed by B-R6, forcing
the exchange of Black's valuable KB. After that the Q in
conjunction with one of the Knights will attempt to force an
entry at KB6 or KR6, as for instance in the following, the moves
of which are taken from a game I once watched and took note of as
being most instructive.

1. Q-Q2, P-Q3; 2. B-KR6, PxP; 3. BxB, KxB; 4. PxP, Q-Q2; 5. Kt-
K4, Kt-Q4; 6. B-B4, QR-Q1; 7. BxKt, PxB; 8. Kt-B6, Q-K3; 9. Q-
Kt5, B-B1 (to prevent Kt-Kt4); 10. QR-K1, Q-B4; 11. Q-R4, P-KR3;
12. Kt-Q4, KtxKt; 13. QxKt, P-B4; 14. Q-Q2, P-Q5; 15. P-KB4, P-
B5; 16. P-KKt4, Q-K3; 17. P-B5, Q-B3; 18. R-K4, B-Kt2; 19. R-B3!,
Q-B4; 20. QxPch, KxQ; 21. R-R3ch, followed by R-R7 or Kt-R7 mate.

A somewhat more difficult case is shown in Diagram 96.

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R | #Kt|    |    | #Kt| #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 |    | #B | #Q |    |    | #P |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 | #P |    |    | #P |    | #B | #P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | #P | #P | ^P | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    | ^P |    | ^P |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    | ^P |    | ^B | ^Kt|    | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^B |    |    | ^P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q | ^R | ^Kt| ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 96

Here the advance of the White King's side pawns has undeniably
produced weaknesses in the pawn skeleton, and these would be
fatal had the Black pieces as much mobility as the White ones.
But the congestion of Black's pieces on the Queen's side makes
his defence unwieldy, and White has no difficulty in accumulating
his forces on the King's side for the final assault. The
prospects are that White will be able to bring home his attack,
before Black has a chance of forcing exchanges and of bringing
about the end-game, which through the weakness of the White pawns
would probably turn to his advantage. The play (E. Cohn-Ed.
Lasker match, Berlin, 1909) is instructive, and shows how the
attack should be conducted in such positions. 1. Kt-Kt3, B-Kt2;
2. K-R2, P-B3; 3. R-KKt1, Kt-Q2; 4. Kt-R4, K-B2. The
concentration of the White pieces has become alarming, and
threatens to be continued by Q-Q2, R-Kt2.  QR-KKt1, and Kt-B5. So
the Black King decides on flight, but he finds no peace on the Q
side either, because there his advanced pawns soon allow White to
make a breach in the Black position.

5. Kt-Kt2, K-K2; 6. Q-K2, Kt-Kt3; 7. KR-KB1, B-B1. It is Black's
intention to play P-B4 as soon as practicable, and to make an
attempt at a counter demonstration on the King's side, 8. P-K B4,
K-Q1? (Black should have kept to his original intention and
played P-B4); 9. PxP, QPxP; 10. Q-B2, Kt-Q2; 11. P-QR4; B-Kt2;
12. PxP, PxP; 13. RxR, BxR. Now White has achieved what he set
out to do. He has opened up avenues of attack on the Queen's
side, and is ready to utilise the weakness of Black's QBP by
playing P-Kt4, on which Black must submit to opening the file for
the White KR or the diagonal for the White QB. In either case
White brings vastly superior forces to bear on the Black King's
position, and Black should lose. In this game Black escaped only
through a mistake on the part of his opponent.

In the foregoing positions it was seen how fatal weaknesses can
be, which are produced by the premature advance of the pawns in
front of the King, on whom the opposing pieces can force their
attack. When the pawns concerned are on the opposite wing to
their King, the disadvantages of a premature advance are felt in
a different way. The weakness concerns the pawns themselves and
not the forces behind them, and is apt to cause the loss of the
end-game, particularly of Rook end-games. Let us compare the
positions in Diagrams 97

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P | #P | #P |    |#Kt | #P |    | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    |    | #P |    | #P |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    | ^B |    |    | #P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    | #B |    |    | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |^Kt | ^P |    |^Kt |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    | ^Q |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag.  97

and 98. In the one case the chain of Black pawns is broken by the
absence of K Kt P, in the other of the Q Kt P. The absence of the
KKt pawn can lead to serious consequences in the middle game,
because of the weakness of Black's KB3 and KR3 (compare Diagram
90); it can, however, hardly become awkward in the end-game, as
the pawns on the B and R files are within the protecting reach of
their King.


        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    |    | #Q |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    | #P | #B | #B | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P | #P |    |#Kt |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |^Kt | ^P |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |^Kt | ^Q |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P | ^P | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    | ^B |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag.  98

On the other hand, the absence of the Q Kt P is of no consequence
for the middle game. There is nothing behind it which could
invite an attack. The QRP and QBP, however, are very weak for the
end-game, as they are quite out of reach of the King (compare
Game No. 19). I do not wish to imply that Black should have
avoided the exchange at his QB3 at all cost; such an exchange has
always the compensating advantage of opening a file for the
Rooks, which advantage often means a favourable middle game, as
will be readily understood. Further, it is often possible to get
rid of the weak QRP by pushing it on, and eventually compelling
the exchange of the opposing Kt P, an exchange which can usually
be enforced if the Rooks have occupied the open Kt file. The pawn
itself is often useful at B 3, in that it can support the advance
of P-Q 4 in the centre, should it be desired, or it can, by
pushing on, be brought to exercise further pressure on the
opposing Kt P.

The break-up of the pawn position on the Q side can become
awkward in the end-game and sometimes in the middle-game when the
pawns can be attacked, and pieces brought to bear on the Queen's
side without leaving the King's side denuded of forces.

This will be illustrated by the position in Diagram 99.

        ---------------------------------------
     8 | #R |    | #B |    |    | #R | #K |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     7 | #P |    | #P |    |    | #P | #P | #P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     6 |    |    | #P |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     5 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     4 |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     3 |    |    |    |    |    | ^B |    |    |
       |---------------------------------------|
     2 | ^P |    | ^P |    |    | ^P | ^P | ^P |
       |---------------------------------------|
     1 | ^R |    |    |    |    | ^R | ^K |    |
        ---------------------------------------
         A    B    C    D    E    F    G    H

                Diag. 99

FROM A GAME FR. LAZARD-ED. LASKER (PARIS, 1914)

Here the pawn positions on both sides are broken, and the player
that occupies the open files first, gets a decisive advantage.
In this case it is Black's move. We can conclude at once that
White has played the opening badly. He must have lost two moves,
for he has still to capture the BP and then, being White, it
should be his move. This disadvantage, small as it may seem, with
which White has emerged from the opening, is sufficient to bring
him into the greatest difficulties. Black, of course, does not
defend the pawn by B-Kt2 or B-Q2, as this would practically
reduce the B to a P and, moreover, White, by R-Kt1 or Q1, would
both attack the B and obtain an open file. Instead of that, Black
utilises the two moves, which he has, as it were, as a gift in an
otherwise equalised position, to bring both Rooks on the Kt file.
This policy allows Black to occupy the seventh or eighth rank at
will, and to attack the White pawns from the flank or rear,
according to circumstances. This menace hampers the radius of
action of the White pieces, as they must always be ready for the
defence of the threatened pawns, and this gives Black by far the
superior game.

The play was continued as follows: 1. ... R-Kt1; 2. BxP, R-Kt7;
3. B-K4, B-K3; 4. P-QR3, KR-Kt1. The Knight's file is now
definitely in Black's hands. White could occupy the Queen's file,
but the Black B at K3, which prevents the entry of the Rooks at
Q7, makes the operation aimless.  Therefore White is condemned to
inactivity. On the contrary, Black's line of action is clear. His
entry on the seventh can only achieve something if White's QBP
can be deprived of its support. To do this Black has only to play
P-QB4-B5 and P-KB4. This, of course, weakens Black's KB, and the
White Rooks might obtain an entry on the K file. Therefore Black
will effect a timely exchange of one of his Rooks, after which
his King alone will hold the K file. These considerations make
the following moves clear: 5. KR-K1, P-QB4; 6. P-KR3, a further
awkward necessity in positions of this kind. Before the Rook can
venture out, a loophole must be provided for the King.

6. ... P-B5; 7. R-K3, R-Kt8ch; 8. RxR, RxRch; 9. K-R2, P-B4; 10.
B-B3, K-B2; 11. B-K2 (threatening R-QB3), R-Kt2; 12. R-QB3, K-B3
(now BxP is not feasible on account of R-QB2); 13. P-B4. White
wishes to keep the Black King from his Q5 but cannot do so
permanently. Black, however, can occupy the Q file with his Rook,
and confine the White King to his wing. 13. ... R-Q2; 14. K-Kt3)
R-Q5; 15. K-B3, K-K2; 16. R-K3, K-Q3; 17. K-Kt3, R-Q7; 18. P-B3,
B-B2. R-R7 would be a mistake on account of RxBch, but the QRP
cannot escape. 19. P-QR4, P-Kt3; 20. B-B3, R-R7; 21. B-Q1, B-Q4;
22. R-K2, R-R8; 23. R-Q2, R-R6; 24. R-QB2, RxRP. Now at last
Black has obtained material gain, which was made possible by his
command of the open Kt file. To convert it into a win by queening
the extra pawn is only a matter of time.

We have now seen how the possession of open files reacts on the
mobility of the opposing forces, forever increasing their
difficulties until the positional advantage is converted into
material gain. We shall meet with cases later on in which the
greater mobility of minor pieces achieves the same result and
find more and more proofs of the truth of the main general
principles which I introduced at the outset.

Let us now recapitulate the chief points touched upon in the
course of our deliberations:

     1. Generally speaking, attacks should only be directed to
objects which cannot be moved away.

     2. If in particular cases the attack is aimed at driving off
an opposing piece from an especially favourable post that attack
is unwise, if it involves the weakening the pawn position, or if
pieces have to take up inferior positions in order to effect
their purpose.

     3. Pawn moves always create weaknesses, either by leaving
other unsupported pawns behind, or by giving opposing pieces
access to squares formerly guarded by them, and this more
specially so in front of the castled King.

     4. Attacks which depend on pawn moves are only justified if
overwhelming forces can be accumulated in support, as the
advanced pawns might become the object of a counter attack.

     5. As pawn moves have very generally some drawbacks, the
middle game is the pieces' own hunting ground.  As in the
opening, the first consideration of sound play in the middle game
is to make only such moves as do not reduce the mobility of the
pieces.

As illustrative of such manoeuvres I shall now give examples from
actual master play. In my annotations of these games I have tried
to keep before the student's mind constantly the main ideas
underlying the different combinations which spring from general
strategical principles. I thus avoid burdening his memory with a
mass of detail, and bring into prominence the basic principle of
each line of play, thereby developing his capacity for conducting
a middle game, even after an unusual opening.

I have fixed mainly upon such games as are illustrative of the
openings treated in the first part of this book. In most cases
the first moves will, therefore, not need any special remarks.
The end-games, being typical examples, will only need reference
to the chapters in which they have been respectively dealt with.

